docs: add comprehensive testing guidelines for UDS packages (#205)
defenseunicorns/uds-common: docs/testing-guidelines.md

## Introduction

This document outlines the testing guidelines and best practices for UDS Packages. These guidelines aim to ensure consistency, reliability, and quality across all of our packages.

## Journey Testing

Journey testing is crucial for ensuring that UDS packages function correctly within their deployment environment and integrate properly with other UDS components.

### **Definition**
A **Journey** in the context of UDS package testing is defined as:
> The minimal and least fragile way to test all features of an application that could be broken from how we deploy it.

### **Key Principles**
- Focus on testing the deployment, not the application itself (that's the upstream developer's job).
- Ensure that our deployment method doesn't break key functionalities.
- Test integration with UDS core components (e.g., Istio, Keycloak).

### **Implementation Guidelines**
- Design tests that cover essential functionality without being overly complex.
- Focus on deployment-related issues (e.g., network policies, SSO access, cluster resource access).
- Handle limitations due to licensing or other constraints by documenting them and implementing what testing is possible.

> ### **Tools**

Reviewer: I think we should...
1. norm around a single testing tool, playwright seems to be the more popular choice
2. Replace or remove jest. I'm not sure of any instances where we've used Jest in uds-packages (I could very well be wrong)
3. We should lean into Zarf component actions and mention that here.

Author: Thanks for your feedback. Here are my thoughts:

1. Standardizing on a single tool: While beneficial, different projects may have varying testing needs. Jest excels at unit and integration testing, particularly in Test-Driven Development (TDD) scenarios, whereas Playwright is specifically designed for end-to-end testing across multiple browsers. I am new to both of these tools and TypeScript, so I could be a bit off-base there.

2. Jest usage: There are a few repos using Jest already. For example [redpanda](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-redpanda/blob/main/tests/journey/redpanda.test.ts) and [argocd](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-argocd/blob/main/tests/journey/argocd.api.test.ts) I'm open to recommending one over the other, but we should clearly define when to use each or if there's a use case for both, to keep it consistent. I also think if we decide that only one should be used that we ensure repos adhere to it.

3. Defining tool usage: Agreed. We should add a "When to use Jest vs Playwright" section to guide teams if that is what we align on.

4. Zarf component actions: Good point. I'll incorporate this into our guidelines. Is there any "shining example" I can reference?

Proposal:
a) Keep both Jest and Playwright
b) Add a section on when to use each
c) Include Zarf component actions info

I think this would keep it flexible while also providing a bit clearer direction. Thoughts?

Reviewer: Your proposal sounds great!

    - **Single package tests:** Aim for <15 minutes runtime
    - **Full CI jobs** (e.g., deploy and test): Maximum 30 minutes
    - **Large integration tests** (multiple packages): Longer durations acceptable

    > **Note:** Strive for individual package tests to complete in under 10 minutes when possible.

## **Best Practice Examples**
The following examples demonstrate best practices for implementing various types of tests in UDS packages:

- ### **Journey Tests**
    ---
    The `uds-package-gitlab` repository provides a good example of journey test implementation.
    These files demonstrate how to set up and structure end-to-end tests using Playwright, including authentication handling and test suite organization.

    - **Test Configuration**: [playwright.config.ts](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/blob/main/tests/playwright.config.ts)
    - **Test Suite**: [gitlab.test.ts](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/blob/main/tests/gitlab.test.ts)
    - **Authentication Setup**: [auth.setup.ts](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/blob/main/tests/auth.setup.ts)

- ### Upgrade Tests
    ---

>     (TODO: Add specific examples of upgrade tests from UDS packages)

Reviewer: Yes!

This UDS common action is reused in packages: 
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/blob/main/.github/actions/test-deploy/action.yaml

Example (everyone's favorite Gitlab):
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/blob/main/tasks.yaml#L48-L68

Author: this was done here: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/pull/205/commits/355f2ca6b82408a837655fc19f367cc90b56cc7b

# Testing Guidelines for UDS Marketplace Apps

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Journey Testing](#journey-testing)
   - [Definition](#definition)
   - [Key Principles](#key-principles)
   - [Implementation Guidelines](#implementation-guidelines)
   - [Tools](#tools)
3. [Upgrade Testing](#upgrade-testing)
   - [Key Considerations](#key-considerations)
4. [Linting and Static Analysis](#linting-and-static-analysis)
   - [Recommended Tools](#recommended-tools)
5. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
6. [Best Practice Examples](#best-practice-examples)
   - [Journey Tests](#journey-tests)
   - [Upgrade Tests](#upgrade-tests-1)
   - [Test Execution](#test-execution)
7. [Consistency Across Packages](#consistency-across-packages)
8. [Contribution and Maintenance](#contribution-and-maintenance)
9. [Related Resources](#related-resources)

> ## <a name="introduction"></a>Introduction

Author: Not dumb, I just followed what I knew, but I hope not. Let me experiment!

> ## <a name="introduction"></a>Introduction

Author: Seems like it works fine w/ the automatically generated anchors from headings, will push this up as part of the latest feedback!

This document outlines the testing guidelines and best practices for UDS Packages. These guidelines aim to ensure consistency, reliability, and quality across all of our packages.

## <a name="journey-testing"></a>Journey Testing

Journey testing is crucial for ensuring that UDS packages function correctly within their deployment environment and integrate properly with other UDS components.

#### <a name="definition"></a>**Definition**

> A **journey** in the context of UDS package testing is defined as:

Author: Yes good call out!

#### <a name="key-considerations"></a>**Key Considerations**
- Test data migration and persistence.
- Verify that configurations are properly carried over or updated.
- Check for any breaking changes in APIs or integrations.

## <a name="linting-and-static-analysis"></a>Linting and Static Analysis

Use appropriate tooling to ensure code quality and consistency.

#### <a name="recommended-tools"></a>**Recommended Tools**
- [YAML Linting](https://github.com/adrienverge/yamllint): `yamllint`
- [Zarf Package Linting](https://docs.zarf.dev/commands/zarf_dev_lint/): `zarf dev lint`
- [Shellcheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/) for any bash scripts.

## <a name="best-practices"></a>**Best Practices**

1. **Consistency**: Use similar testing approaches across different UDS packages where possible.
2. **Documentation**: Clearly document what each test is checking and why.
3. **Maintenance**: Keep tests updated as the application and deployment methods evolve.
4. **CI/CD Integration**: Incorporate all types of tests into your CI/CD pipeline.
5. **Error Handling**: Ensure tests fail gracefully and provide clear error messages.

> 6. **Idempotency**: Ensure tests produce consistent results regardless of execution order. Design them to handle dynamic and asynchronous workloads without compromising output integrity.

Reviewer 2: I think we want "repeatable" or another word that "Idempotency" which has other (pedantic) specific meaning

Author: Good call out! I stuck with the original section names but "Repeatability" makes more sense here.

7. **Performance Consideration**: Balance thoroughness with rapid developer feedback:
    - **Single package tests:** Aim for <15 minutes runtime
    - **Full CI jobs** (e.g., deploy and test): Maximum 30 minutes
    - **Large integration tests** (multiple packages): Longer durations acceptable

    > **Note:** Strive for individual package tests to complete in under 10 minutes when possible.

> ## <a name="best-practice-examples"></a>**Best Practice Examples**

Reviewer 2: as a structural / stylistic question - should we pull the examples up as sub-sections to the sections where we define them?

Author: I think I follow. Rather than a "Definition" and then a separate "Best Practice Example" for each definition, basically melding the two? I agree, it would be more cohesive to make these sections blended.

Author: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/pull/205/commits/60103b9bfefa1066caeffec5542fee9d3aa1c365 this aimed to combine the 2 sections. I reordered it a bit cause I think it flowed better that way, let me know if you'd like me to change any piece of it.

I do think it is kind of crowded? But ultimately I think it's a good change.

# Testing Guidelines for UDS Marketplace Apps

## Introduction

> This document outlines the testing guidelines and best practices for UDS Marketplace Apps. These guidelines aim to ensure consistency, reliability, and quality across all UDS packages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document outlines the testing guidelines and best practices for UDS Packages. These guidelines aim to ensure consistency, reliability, and quality across all of our packages.
```

## 1. Journey Testing

Journey testing is crucial for ensuring that UDS packages function correctly within their deployment environment and integrate properly with other UDS components.

#### **Definition**
A **journey** in the context of UDS package testing is defined as:
> The minimal and least fragile way to test all features of an application that could be broken from how we deploy it.

#### **Key Principles**
- Focus on testing the deployment, not the application itself (that's the upstream developer's job).
- Ensure that our deployment method doesn't break key functionalities.
- Test integration with UDS core components (e.g., Istio, Keycloak).

#### **Implementation Guidelines**
- Design tests that cover essential functionality without being overly complex.
- Focus on deployment-related issues (e.g., network policies, SSO access, cluster resource access).
- Handle limitations due to licensing or other constraints by documenting them and implementing what testing is possible.

#### **Tools**
- UI Testing: Playwright, Cypress
- Non-UI Testing: Jest

> - Custom Scripts: Bash or other scripting languages as needed

Reviewer 2: can we add a clause that if we use bash we also integrate with [`shellcheck`](https://www.shellcheck.net/) to get ahead of correctness issues?

## 2. Upgrade Testing
Ensure that the current development package works when deployed over the previously released version.

#### **Key Considerations**
- Test data migration and persistence.
- Verify that configurations are properly carried over or updated.
- Check for any breaking changes in APIs or integrations.

## 3. Linting and Static Analysis

Use appropriate tooling to ensure code quality and consistency.

#### **Recommended Tools**
- YAML Linting: `yamllint`

> - Zarf Package Linting: `zarf dev lint`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Zarf Package Linting: `zarf dev lint`
- Shellcheck (https://www.shellcheck.net/) for any bash scripts
```

## **Best Practices**

1. **Consistency**: Use similar testing approaches across different UDS packages where possible.
2. **Documentation**: Clearly document what each test is checking and why.
3. **Maintenance**: Keep tests updated as the application and deployment methods evolve.
4. **CI/CD Integration**: Incorporate all types of tests into your CI/CD pipeline.
5. **Error Handling**: Ensure tests fail gracefully and provide clear error messages.

> 6. **Idempotency**: Design tests to be repeatable and produce consistent results.

Reviewer 2: I love idempotency but I'm not sure that's what we're capturing in the description of it.  Do we explicitly mean "repeated runs of the same test provide the same result" or do we mean "our tests are isolated and durable enough that regardless of ordering our tests get the same results"?

Author: I would say the latter, but I am also not super familiar with all of the testing strategies here yet. I am assuming that given the dynamic / async nature of some of these workloads that they might not ever be "repeatable" in the same order, but should be "repeatable" in terms of output. If that sounds good let me know and I can clean up the above!

Author: Should now be incorporated: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/pull/205/commits/18853a49170b3cb54ba43d0f6f58d7fb6d9accf1

> 7. **Performance Consideration**: While thorough, tests should not unnecessarily slow down the development process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. **Performance Consideration**: While thorough, tests should not unnecessarily slow down the development process - beyond 30 minutes is too long for a single package test.
```

Reviewer 3: We could tighten that but from my experience 30 mins is _way_ too long for CI of a single package.

Reviewer 2: I would love to say 15 min because that's generally my maximum threshold for CI to run but it is possible that this shape of test requires more - thoughts?

Author: From my experience (external from here) long tests make for slow feedback loops (unless you can emulate behavior locally). I'd be happy to reduce this as much as you think is permissible. Anecdotally when I ran through the tests on `uds-core` the other day it took >20 mins for at least one of the tests there, so I just want to make sure it aligns with expectations.

Reviewer 4: While i agree philosophically with @daveworth < 15 min is not really possible if "test" is defined as the "full CI job to deploy said app and then any tests executed against it running to completion", rather than "after package is deployed run a suite of tests". 

It takes >15 min to deploy and test a gitlab install and ~18 min to run the upgrade and then test. 

The full SWF integration repo bundle test (bundle not package on full uds-core) takes just over 30 min, but is testing like 6 packages so its a little different. 

I think less than 30 min is a good threshold for a rule. That being said its the upper limit. Most package tests should be sub 10 min.

Author: I did my best to encapsulate the above as part of this commit: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/pull/205/commits/18853a49170b3cb54ba43d0f6f58d7fb6d9accf1

## **Implementation Examples**

> (TODO: Add brief examples or links to exemplar implementations of journey tests, upgrade tests, and linting configurations from various UDS packages)

Reviewer 3: Some for consideration:
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/blob/main/tasks/test.yaml
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab/tree/main/tests
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab-runner/blob/main/tasks/test.yaml
https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-package-gitlab-runner/tree/main/tests

Reviewer 2: I like this - in time we will want to use these sorts of examples to codify the above "Consistency" best-practice.

Author: The only thing I wasn't sure about was "Upgrade Tests". Otherwise these links were added in in this commit: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-common/pull/205/commits/18853a49170b3cb54ba43d0f6f58d7fb6d9accf1
